= Xmlss
A ruby DSL for generating spreadsheets in the XML Spreadsheet format.  It provides an api for constructing spreadsheet data and then uses that data to generate xml that can be interpreted by MS Excel.

** Note: this gem only generates XML according to a subset of the August 2001 XML Spreadsheet spec (http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa140066(office.10).aspx).  It does not generate the more modern open office spreadsheet spec (xlsx) and may have limited support in modern spreadsheet applications.

== Installation

    gem install xmlss

== Simple Example

    require 'xmlss'

    workbook = Xmlss::Worksheet.new do

      worksheet("5 columns, 1 row") {
        5.times do
          column
        end

          row {
            # put data into the row (infer type)
            [1, "text", 123.45, "0001267", "$45.23"].each do |data_value|
              cell { data data_value }
            end
          }
        end
      }

    end

    workbook.to_s    # => "..." (XML Spreadsheet xml string)

== DSL / API

Use these directives to create workbook markup elements.

worksheet(name):
* name: string

column(apts={}):
* opts[:style_id]: string
* opts[:width]: numeric
* opts[:auto_fit_width]: bool, default: false
* opts[:hidden]: bool, default: false

row(opts={}):
* opts[:style_id]: string
* opts[:height]: numeric
* opts[:auto_fit_height]: bool, default: false
* opts[:hidden]: bool, default: false

cell(opts={}):
* opts[:style_id]: string
* opts[:href]: string
* opts[:formula]: string
* opts[:merge_across]: fixnum, default: 0
* opts[:merge_down]: fixnum, default: 0

data(value, opts={}):
* value: whatever
* opts[:type]: enum: :number, :date_time, :boolean, :string, :error
* the :type option is defaulted appropriately based on the value - use the option to override as necessary

Use these directives to define markup element styles.  Bind to markup using the element's :style_id option.  See 'examples/styles.rb' for more details.

style(id):
* id: string, must be unique to the workbook

alignment(opts={}):
* opts[:wrap_text]: bool, default: false
* opts[:rotate]: fixnum (-90 to 90)
* opts[:horizontal]: enum: :automatic, :left, :center, :right, :default
* opts[:vertical]: enum: :automatic, :top, :center, :bottom, :default

borders:
* use this to build a set of border directives (see examples/styles.rb for details)

border(opts={}):
* opts[:color]: string, hex value ('#00FF00')
* opts[:position]: enum: :left, :top, :right, :bottom
* opts[:style]: enum: :none, :continuous (default), :dash, :dot, :dash_dot, :dash_dot_dot
* opts[:weight]: enum: :hairline, :thin (default), :medium, :thick

font(opts={}):
* opts[:bold]: bool, default: false
* opts[:color]: string, hex value ('#00FF00')
* opts[:name]: string
* opts[:italic]: bool, default: false
* opts[:size]: fixnum
* opts[:strike_through]: bool, default: false
* opts[:shadow]: bool, default: false
* opts[:underline]: enum: :single, :double, :single_accounting, :double_accounting
* opts[:alignment]: enum: :subscript, :superscript

interior(opts={}):
* opts[:color]: string, hex value ('#00FF00')
* opts[:pattern]: enum (see code for options), default: :default
* opts[:pattern_color]: string, hex value ('#00FF00')

number_format(opts={}):  # TODO: just pass value directly
* opts[:format]: there are MANY different options for this, I suggest saving a spreadsheet in the XML format and seeing what Excel uses

protection(opts={}):  # TODO: just pass value directly
* opts[:protected]: bool, default: false

== Usage

To generate a spreadsheet, create an Xmlss::Workbook instance and build the workbook using the above DSL.  Workbook takes two optional parameters:
* opts: hash: :data, :output
* &build: proc containing DSL directives

=== Data option

Xmlss evals the build proc in the scope of the workbook instance.  This means that the build has access to only the data it is given or the DSL itself.  Data is given in the form of a Hash.  The string form of the hash keys are exposed as local workbook methods that return their corresponding values.

    Xmlss::Workbook.new(:data => {:sheet_name => 'A cool sheet'}) do
      worksheet(sheet_name) {
        ...
      }
    end

=== Output option (Undies)

Xmlss uses Undies (https://github.com/kelredd/undies) to render the XML output.  The :output Workbook option is used to create Undies::Ouput objects.  See their docs for usage details (https://github.com/kelredd/undies/blob/master/README.rdoc).

    Xmlss::Workbook.new(:output => {:pp => 2}) do
      worksheet(sheet_name) {
        ...
      }
    end

=== Builder approach

The above examples all pass in a build proc that is eval'd in the scope of the workbook instance.  This works great when you know your build at the same time you create your Workbook object.  However, in some cases, the build may not be known upfront or you may want to use a more declarative style to specify your spreadsheet content.  Workbook builds can be specified programmatically using the "builder" approach.

To render using this approach, create a Workbook instance passing it data and output info as above.  However, don't pass any build proc and save off the created workbook:

    # choosing not to use any local data or output options
    workbook = Xmlss::Workbook.new

Now just interact with the Workbook API directly.

    # notice that it becomes less important to bind any local data to the Workbook using this approach
    something = "Some Thing!"
    workbook.worksheet(something) {
      workbook.column

      workbook.row {
        workbook.cell {
          workbook.data "hi hi something hi"
        }
      }
    }

== Disclaimer

Be aware this library only provides the basic, raw API for constructing spreadsheets using this spec and utilities to convert those objects to string xml data representing them.  It does not provide any macro logic to aid in constructing the sheets.  If you want a more convenient API for your use case, I suggest subclassing the objects and tailoring them to your needs.

The XML Spreadsheet spec and format are legacy and may have limited support depending on your version of MS Excel.  For a more modern spreadsheet generation method, I suggest looking into Office Open XML Workbook format (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office_Open_XML).

* Full XML Spreadsheet spec: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa140066(office.10).aspx

== License

Copyright (c) 2011-Present, Kelly D. Redding

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
